Our goal for our group project is to understand how heavily air quality affects prevalence of asthma in certain communities. By doing so, we can understand how important it is to live in a county with good air quality, and how at risk you may be by living next to certain polluting structures like factories or chemical plants. The main research question that we want to address is, “how strong is the influence of air pollution on the development of asthma in those same counties?”. By looking at the correlation of counties with poor air quality and their relative level of asthma, we can begin to develop an understanding to answer this question. While it may be known that air quality can have direct links to asthma, we can confirm this on a county level, and understand which counties are also in danger the most. Drawing back to our discussion in lecture, this can play a role in deciding where to live, and there may also be deeper socioeconomic ties to poor air quality as well.
	The team consists of two members, Sam Birdsley, and Michael Strobl. Our goal is to evenly divide the work between the two data sets to ensure that we both have a strong understanding for the data we are working with and the complete end-to-end process of data analysis. Sam will primarily focus on the air quality data set, while Michael will focus on the disease data. We will discuss both data sets later in this report. Once we have a structured approach for each data set, we can come together to draw important insights. This will ensure that by splitting the work this way, we can refrain from any bias and make sure that the results are accurate. We will have weekly meetings to make sure that the progress is consistent and on track.
	Talking more about the specific datasets, we will first look at the county-level disease data obtained from the Center for Disease Control. We specifically downloaded the 2020 release, since that was the most recent publication of county-level data. The dataset we obtained was downloaded in Comma Separated Values format and contains information on different types of diseases such as cancer, stroke, and also asthma. We will primarily focus on the asthma columns during our project; however, a future area of exploration could be looking at other diseases such as cancer and looking for any correlation there. The second data set we will incorporate is air quality data, also at the county level. This data set was obtained from the Environmental Protection Agency, and they publish reports up to the year 2024. However, due to the limitations on the other data set and its releases, we chose the 2019 air quality report. While it is not quite clear how long it takes for poor air quality to cause an increase in asthma, we chose to offset the data sets by one year to hopefully capture some kind of cause and effect. A potential area to investigate further could be obtaining all of the air quality reports by year, observing the change in air quality over years, and comparing counties with negative deltas to their asthma reports to see if there is a large uptick. While this may not be in the scope for our project, this could be worth looking into in the future.
	As we previously mentioned, our group will have weekly check-ins to ensure that we are on track for the midpoint check-in, as well as the final report. We will start by doing some basic exploratory data analysis to understand what we are working with and any important features such as scaling, missing values, and data types that need to be modified. After we are aware of what we are working with, we can remove or screen any sensitive information to ensure our datasets have proper governance for uploading into a public space. However, since this data was obtained from government agencies, there may not be much governance components left up to our group. Once we have the files stored and enriched, we can investigate data quality measurements to ensure that we are working with trustworthy datasets to give accurate insights. Once at this point, we can integrate a workflow that will execute on all the important parts to hopefully leave us with key takeaways and trustworthy insights. Finally, we will implement documentation to ensure that anyone else will have the proper instruction and understanding of the work that we have completed.
A possible constraint in our project is that we don’t have a dataset going in depth on socioeconomic factors to asthma rates at the county level. Without this, it could be harder to account for confounding variables like income, education, healthcare access, and more, which would be available in a dataset covering this topic. This limitation could make it difficult to determine whether correlations between quality and asthma are directly related to population or partially due to economic differences. As a result of this, our analysis may not fully capture health inequities between county's.
In this section, we highlight the remaining gaps in our project. One of the main challenges is addressing the time lag for impact. It is unclear how far in advance air quality affects asthma rates, so we need to determine the difference in years (multiple years prior, one year prior, etc.) to capture meaningful data. Another important consideration is confounding factors, other variables, such as population density, socioeconomic status, or general access to healthcare in that county could have a major impact on asthma prevalence, and we need to decide how to account for these factors to reflect the true relationship. Another gap is the absence of additional datasets or the need to obtain complementary data from alternative sources to strengthen our analysis. As mentioned previously, these areas present areas of potential further exploration after this project is concluded. Taking these factors into account would give us a more holistic approach, however they do not fit in the scope of this group project.
